README.md, before:

# StringLang

An interpreted, expression-oriented language where everything evaluates to strings.

## Usage

### Installation

You need Go to build the official interpreter from this repository.

Run `go get github.com/skius/stringlang/cmd/stringlang` to install the interpreter on your machine. You can then
run it using `stringlang <program.stringlang> <arg0> <arg1> ...`

### Running from code

To interpret StringLang code from your Go program, all you need is the following:
```go
package main
import "github.com/skius/stringlang"

func main() {
    stringlang := `"Replace me with the " + "source code of your StringLang program"`
    expr, err := stringlang.Parse(stringlang)
    if err != nil {
        panic(err)
    }
    // The built-in functions your StringLang program will have access to
    funcs := []map[string]func([]string)string{
        "length": func (as []string) string { return len(as[0]) },
        // Add more built-in functions here
    }
    // Arguments to your StringLang program
    args := os.Args
    ctx := NewContext(args, funcs)
    result := expr.Eval(ctx)
}
```

### Contributing

Feel free to open Issues and Pull Requests! The language specification and interpreter is by no means final.
To change the syntax of the language, you'll need to modify `lang.bnf` and also `ast/ast.go` if you need new structures.
Every time you change `lang.bnf`, you need to run `gocc lang.bnf` to generate the new parser and lexer.

Get the parser generator `gocc` used in this project from: [goccmack/gocc](https://github.com/goccmack/gocc)

### Example StringLang programs

See `stringlang_programs/`

## Syntax

The following code block contains a simple (and not 100% correct, see Caveats section below the block) overview of what
constitutes a `StringLang` source file. The complete grammar can be found in `lang.bnf`.

```
identifier: any string of alphanumeric and underscore characters not beginning with a digit
number: positive integer
string_literal: a "double-quoted" string, containing any sequence of characters


program:
     header block           

header:
    function1 function2 ... functionN                       // N may be 0  

function:
    fun identifier(param1, param2, ..., paramN) { block }   // paramX are identifiers, N may be 0

block:
    expression1; expression2; ...; expressionN              // no trailing semi-colon and N cannot be 0

expression:
    string_literal
    identifier
    identifier = expression
    $number
    expression[expression]
    expression[number]
    identifier(expression1, expression2, ..., expressionN)  // N can be 0
    
    expression || expression
    expression && expression
    expression != expression
    expression == expression
    expression + expression
    
    (expression)
    
    ifelse
    while
    
ifelse:
    if (expression) { block } else { block }
    if (expression) { block } else ifelse                   // This effectively allows else-if 
    
while:
    while (expression) { block }
```

### Caveats
While the above description gives a good overview of `StringLang`, there are some important notes to be made:
1) `identifier = expression` may only appear (but possibly repeated) at the beginning of an expression without parentheses, e.g. 
   `a = b = c = "foo";`. Otherwise they need to be inside parentheses, e.g. `"foo" + (a = c = "bar")`.
2) A block is a non-empty, `;` -separated list of expressions, with no trailing `;`.
3) A call (`identifier(expr1, ..., exprN)`) may also be without arguments, i.e. `identifier()`

## Semantics

### Values

All expressions/values in `StringLang` are Strings.

### Functions

Functions in `StringLang` can either be user-defined (i.e. they are written in `StringLang` and reside
in the header of the interpreted file), or they can be built-in (i.e. supplied to the interpreter
via the context, see the Context section). Because built-in functions are written in Go, they can accomplish anything
Go can accomplish. 

User-defined `StringLang` functions are evaluated with their own completely separate variable scope and
are mutually recursive. The arguments passed to them are bound to the variables in the corresponding parameter lists.

All functions in `StringLang` are pass-by-value.

### Binary Operators

The following list gives the binary operators, ordered from low to high precedence:
```
||   Or              Interprets operands as booleans           
&&   And             Interprets operands as booleans  
!=   Not Equals      Compares the values of the operands
==   Equals          Compares the values of the operands
+    Concatenation   Concatenates the operands
```
#### Note: 
1) The boolean value of a `StringLang` value is `true` 
if and only if the String is not `""` and not `"false"`, else it is `false`.
2) The `StringLang` value of a boolean result of a logic operation is always either `"true"` or `"false"` 

### Evaluation 
```
string_literal              The value of 'string_literal'
identifier                  The current value of the variable with identifier 'identifier'.
identifier = expression     The value of 'expression'. 
                            Side effect: Variable 'identifier' now has that value.
$number                     The value of the 'number'-th (zero-indexed) argument to the program.
expr1[expr2 or number]      The character at position 'expr2' resp. 'number' of the value 
                            that 'expr1' evaluates to.
identifier(expr1, ...)      Function call to function 'identifier' with arguments 'expr1, ...'.
                            Arguments are evaluated before passed to the function.
                            Evaluates to the function's return value.
expr1 <binop> expr2         The value of the corresponding binary operation. 

ifelse                      The value of the then-block if the condition evaluates to a true value,
                            or the value of the else-block if the condition evaluates to a false value.
while                       The value of the last iteration of the block if it gets executed once, else "".
                            Side effects: All iterations might cause side effects
                            
block                       The value of the last expression in the block.
                            Side effects: Evaluates all expressions in the list.

```

#### Exceptions, errors, defaults

In the case of an invalid (out-of-bounds or NaN) character-access or argument expression,
the returned value is always `""`. The values of all variables are initialized to `""`.

### Context (functions and arguments)

To evaluate a `StringLang` program, the interpreter needs an `stringlang.Context` object.
It contains fields which allow the interpreter's user to supply their custom built-in functions and arguments to the program.
See `cmd/stringlang/main.go` for an example.

There are also some stoppers, mainly a limit for the number of iterations a `while` loop can do 
before being prematurely stopped and one to cap how large the sum of the sizes of all variable-values is allowed to become.

## Why?

It started out as a simple String builder using provided arguments (read: `"my string".replace("$0", args[0])...`) 
for a chat bot, which allowed generating new commands in-chat. 
After switching to a parsed grammar for some simple operators, I figured why not just make it Turing-complete.
What could possibly go wrong allowing users to build their own commands...

Commit message:

Improve stack size checking, add exit-channel to kill evaluation

README.md, after:

# StringLang

An interpreted, expression-oriented language where everything evaluates to strings.

## Usage

### Installation

You need Go to build the official interpreter from this repository.

Run `go get github.com/skius/stringlang/cmd/stringlang` to install the interpreter on your machine. You can then
run it using `stringlang <program.stringlang> <arg0> <arg1> ...`

### Running from code

To interpret StringLang code from your Go program, all you need is the following:
```go
package main
import "github.com/skius/stringlang"

func main() {
    stringlang := `"Replace me with the " + "source code of your StringLang program"`
    expr, err := stringlang.Parse(stringlang)
    if err != nil {
        panic(err)
    }
    // The built-in functions your StringLang program will have access to
    funcs := []map[string]func([]string)string{
        "length": func (as []string) string { return len(as[0]) },
        // Add more built-in functions here
    }
    // Arguments to your StringLang program
    args := os.Args
    ctx := NewContext(args, funcs)
    result := expr.Eval(ctx)
}
```

### Contributing

Feel free to open Issues and Pull Requests! The language specification and interpreter is by no means final.
To change the syntax of the language, you'll need to modify `lang.bnf` and also `ast/ast.go` if you need new structures.
Every time you change `lang.bnf`, you need to run `gocc lang.bnf` to generate the new parser and lexer.

Get the parser generator `gocc` used in this project from: [goccmack/gocc](https://github.com/goccmack/gocc)

### Example StringLang programs

See `stringlang_programs/`

## Syntax

The following code block contains a simple (and not 100% correct, see Caveats section below the block) overview of what
constitutes a `StringLang` source file. The complete grammar can be found in `lang.bnf`.

```
identifier: any string of alphanumeric and underscore characters not beginning with a digit
number: positive integer
string_literal: a "double-quoted" string, containing any sequence of characters


program:
     header block           

header:
    function1 function2 ... functionN                       // N may be 0  

function:
    fun identifier(param1, param2, ..., paramN) { block }   // paramX are identifiers, N may be 0

block:
    expression1; expression2; ...; expressionN              // no trailing semi-colon and N cannot be 0

expression:
    string_literal
    identifier
    identifier = expression
    $number
    expression[expression]
    expression[number]
    identifier(expression1, expression2, ..., expressionN)  // N can be 0
    
    expression || expression
    expression && expression
    expression != expression
    expression == expression
    expression + expression
    
    (expression)
    
    ifelse
    while
    
ifelse:
    if (expression) { block } else { block }
    if (expression) { block } else ifelse                   // This effectively allows else-if 
    
while:
    while (expression) { block }
```

### Caveats
While the above description gives a good overview of `StringLang`, there are some important notes to be made:
1) `identifier = expression` may only appear (but possibly repeated) at the beginning of an expression without parentheses, e.g. 
   `a = b = c = "foo";`. Otherwise they need to be inside parentheses, e.g. `"foo" + (a = c = "bar")`.
2) A block is a non-empty, `;` -separated list of expressions, with no trailing `;`.
3) A call (`identifier(expr1, ..., exprN)`) may also be without arguments, i.e. `identifier()`

## Semantics

### Values

All expressions/values in `StringLang` are Strings.

### Functions

Functions in `StringLang` can either be user-defined (i.e. they are written in `StringLang` and reside
in the header of the interpreted file), or they can be built-in (i.e. supplied to the interpreter
via the context, see the Context section). Because built-in functions are written in Go, they can accomplish anything
Go can accomplish. 

User-defined `StringLang` functions are evaluated with their own completely separate variable scope and
are mutually recursive. The arguments passed to them are bound to the variables in the corresponding parameter lists.

All functions in `StringLang` are pass-by-value.

### Binary Operators

The following list gives the binary operators, ordered from low to high precedence:
```
||   Or              Interprets operands as booleans           
&&   And             Interprets operands as booleans  
!=   Not Equals      Compares the values of the operands
==   Equals          Compares the values of the operands
+    Concatenation   Concatenates the operands
```
#### Note: 
1) The boolean value of a `StringLang` value is `true` 
if and only if the String is not `""` and not `"false"`, else it is `false`.
2) The `StringLang` value of a boolean result of a logic operation is always either `"true"` or `"false"` 

### Evaluation 
```
string_literal              The value of 'string_literal'
identifier                  The current value of the variable with identifier 'identifier'.
identifier = expression     The value of 'expression'. 
                            Side effect: Variable 'identifier' now has that value.
$number                     The value of the 'number'-th (zero-indexed) argument to the program.
expr1[expr2 or number]      The character at position 'expr2' resp. 'number' of the value 
                            that 'expr1' evaluates to.
identifier(expr1, ...)      Function call to function 'identifier' with arguments 'expr1, ...'.
                            Arguments are evaluated before passed to the function.
                            Evaluates to the function's return value.
expr1 <binop> expr2         The value of the corresponding binary operation. 

ifelse                      The value of the then-block if the condition evaluates to a true value,
                            or the value of the else-block if the condition evaluates to a false value.
while                       The value of the last iteration of the block if it gets executed once, else "".
                            Side effects: All iterations might cause side effects
                            
block                       The value of the last expression in the block.
                            Side effects: Evaluates all expressions in the list.

```

#### Exceptions, errors, defaults

In the case of an invalid (out-of-bounds or NaN) character-access or argument expression,
the returned value is always `""`. The values of all variables are initialized to `""`.

### Context (functions and arguments)

To evaluate a `StringLang` program, the interpreter needs an `stringlang.Context` object.
It contains fields which allow the interpreter's user to supply their custom built-in functions and arguments to the program.
See `cmd/stringlang/main.go` for an example.

There is a channel available with `context.GetExitChannel()` for quickly killing the whole evaluation.
Additionally, one can set the (approximate) maximum stack space in bytes the `StringLang` program is allowed to use by
setting `context.MaxStackSize` to a non-negative number. `cmd/stringlang/main.go` also contains examples
for these two features. 

## Why?

It started out as a simple String builder using provided arguments (read: `"my string".replace("$0", args[0])...`) 
for a chat bot, which allowed generating new commands in-chat. 
After switching to a parsed grammar for some simple operators, I figured why not just make it Turing-complete.
What could possibly go wrong allowing users to build their own commands...
